---
title: "LING 720: Language Typology"
collection: teaching
permalink: /teaching/2020-ling720
date: 2020-08-01
term: "Fall 2020"
crn: TBA
time: "Tues / Thurs 1:30-2:45"
location: "Online and video conference"
description: "Language typology deals with how and why the elements of language interact and function. Students acquire a broad overview of the grammatical make-up of languages in general and understanding of functional-typological linguistics."
status: "active"
---


## Overview
This course explores the structural diversity of the world’s languages from a functional-typological perspective. We focus on morphological and grammatical structures, including morphological typology; word order patterns; lexical categories; alignment and grammatical relations; voice and valency changing constructions; and clause combining. Some attention is also given to quantitative typology and to explanations for the distributions of typological features. However, this is not a course in typological universals. 

Typological classification groups languages according to shared structural traits. This contrasts with genetic classification, with groups languages according to their  descent from a common ancestor.  origin. Typological features may delineate linguistic areas, reflecting diffusion across genetically unrelated languages. Typological features may also be shared across geographically separated languages, reflecting shared functional pressures. 

Note that while much of the reading for this course draws from the functionalist literature, the purpose of this course is not to advocate for any particular theory of grammar. Rather, I have chosen readings which will be broadly accessible to students of all theoretical backgrounds, in hopes of conveying the diversity of grammatical structures in the world’s languages.

## Course Objectives and Student Learning Outcomes

At the end of this course students will be able to:
* describe the range of attested grammatical structures in the world’s languages
* understand functional motivations for different types of structures
* have knowledge of the geographic distribution of major structural types
* know which typological features are more common cross-linguistically, and which are less frequently attested

## Course format and responsibilities

Due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic this course will be distance delivered, using a hybrid model combining recorded lectures, asynchronous discussions, and synchronous (Zoom)  video meetings. Students will need access to an internet-connected device with video conferencing capabilities (i.e., camera and microphone). 
As a seminar course, the amount of  lecture will be kept to a minimum. Students will be responsible for reading, presenting, and discussing articles in class. These discussions will occasionally be supplemented by lecture material recorded by the instructor. Attendance and participation is required. Unexcused absences will result in lowering of your course grade. Late assignments will be accepted only in extenuating circumstances, and only at reduced credit. 

Students will focus on a particular language (or language group) and provide regular reports throughout the class on relevant typological features of that language.  A final paper providing a typological overview of the language will be due at the end of the term. 

## Readings

We will be loosely following Croft’s Typology and Universals, though we will draw heavily on additional readings, particularly the chapters in the 3-volume Language Typology and Syntactic Description, ed. by T. Shopen (Cambridge, 2007). However, there are only six required readings from this book, and all readings are available on [Laulima](http://bit.ly/ling720laulima). 

Readings are listed in the schedule on the day that they will be discussed. This means that those readings should be completed prior to that class meeting. Students will take turns presenting the reading to the class; a sign-up sheet will be circulated during the first week of class. When presenting a reading you should begin with a short (~10 min) summary, followed by some questions raised by the reading. You will then lead the class discussion in the reading.  Please note that the reading schedule may be revised over the course of the term to accommodate student interest in particular topics; thus the schedule below serves as a rough guide only. 

Due to time constraints we can only cover a small portion of the extant literature on syntactic typology. The citation lists in the chosen articles provide additional sources, and additional sources can also be found in the bibliography at the end of the [syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JepYiykBKcDp8uhM15UjvbhQMVJRV7BXJG1LeBa2YFg/edit?usp=sharing). In researching the typological features of your adopted language (see below) you will want to consult additional resources beyond those discussed in class.



## Tentative topics to be covered


* Morphological typology

* Lexical categories

* Grammatical relations and alignment


* Voice and valence changing constructions

* Clause Combining

* Quantitative methods

* The nature of universals and the future of typology


## Disabilities services
Any student who feels they may need an accommodation based on the impact of a disability is invited to contact me privately. I would be happy to work with you and the KOKUA Program (Office for Students with Disabilities) to ensure reasonable accommodations in my course. You can also contact KOKUA at (808) 956-7511 or (808) 956-7612 (voice/text) in room 013 of the Queen Lili‘uokalani Center for Student Services.

Need internet access off campus? Here's a list of free [wifi hotspots](https://www.wifimap.io/2988-honolulu-free-wifi/map).

For more information see the complete [syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JepYiykBKcDp8uhM15UjvbhQMVJRV7BXJG1LeBa2YFg/edit?usp=sharing).

