---
title: "LING 105: Endangered Languages, Globalization and Indigenous Peoples"
collection: teaching
permalink: /teaching/2021-ling105
date: 2021-01-01
term: "Spring 2021"
crn: TBA
time: "TBA"
location: "Online and video conference"
description: "Global perspectives on the threats to human linguistic diversity; the value of linguistic diversity to communities, linguistic science and humanity; and efforts being undertaken to reclaim Indigenous languages."
status: "active"
---


## Overview
This is an introductory course that focuses on language endangerment, globalization, and Indigenous peoples. Many of us in Hawai‘i are familiar with the struggles and successes of the Hawaiian language revival movement, but language endangerment is a global issue, with impacts disproportionately affecting Indigenous and minority peoples. Perhaps half of the world’s 7000 or so languages are no longer being learned by children and thus at risk of being lost and forgotten. Why should we care? This course will explore the many answers to this question by examining the value of Indigenous languages to communities, to linguistic science, and to humanity. Drawing on case studies from a wide range of languages around the world, we explore the unique insights that languages provide and the ways in which language shape and are shaped by culture. We will explore the connections between language loss and environmental factors, particularly biocultural diversity. And we will examine the factors that lead to language shift, as well as the many ongoing efforts to reverse this shift.

## Course Objectives and Student Learning Outcomes
Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to:

* describe the endangered languages issue from the perspective of Hawai‘i, the Pacific and the world;

* identify factors (cultural, international, political and social) that play a role in language endangerment, as well as protective factors which enhance language vitality;

* understand the relationship between Indigenous languages and wordviews, including the ways in which culture shapes language;

* understand the links between linguistic and biocultural diversity;

* use existing tools to assess language vitality, while also understanding the limitations and challenges of those tools;

* demonstrate habits for self-study and time management that will contribute to success in academia and beyond.

## Course format 

Due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic this course will be distance delivered, using a hybrid model combining recorded lectures, asynchronous discussions (Laulima), and synchronous (Zoom)  video meetings. Students will need access to an internet-connected device with video conferencing capabilities (i.e., camera and microphone). 
As a seminar course, the amount of  lecture will be kept to a minimum. Students will be responsible for reading, presenting, and discussing articles in class. These discussions will occasionally be supplemented by lecture material recorded by the instructor. Attendance and participation is required. Unexcused absences will result in lowering of your course grade. Late assignments will be accepted only in extenuating circumstances, and only at reduced credit. 


## Global & Multicultural Perspectives
This course fulfills the [Foundations Global B](https://manoa.hawaii.edu/gened/req/foundations/) (FGB) General Education requirement, addressing global processes and cross-cultural interactions from a variety of perspectives.  Upon successful completion of this course, students will have satisfied this General Education requirement.

## Textbooks

The following required textbooks are available for purchase at the campus bookstore or online.

> *Language Endangerment*, by David and Maya Bradley. 2019. Cambridge University Press.

> *Dying Words: Endangered languages and what they have to tell us*, by Nicholas Evans. 2010. Wiley-Blackwell.


## Syllabus
(Link TBA)

